GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
JAMES COMEY, FBI Director: We
hope that our
fellow Americans will not let
fear become
disabling.
GWEN IFILL: A nation in mourning
searches
for answers. At least 49
innocent people are
dead and 53 wounded in the worst
mass shooting
in modern American history --
how a gay Orlando
nightclub became a target for
tragedy.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Here at this
center, which
is the hub of the LGBT community
in Orlando,
there is a mixture of sadness,
and anger,
and strength in the face of this
horrendous
act.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead:
Presidential candidates
weigh in with stark differences
-- how the
murdering rampage in Florida
will alter the
campaign going forward.
GWEN IFILL: And we examine how
Orlando is
sparking a national debate on
gun control
and hate crimes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that on
tonight's "PBS
NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: Orlando, a city that
evokes theme
parks and good times, now also a
blood-stained
entry in American history, 49
people, plus
the killer, slain at a gay
nightclub. Sunday's
massacre led today to a search
for motive
and for missed signals.
William Brangham begins our
coverage in Orlando.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: There was
relative calm
outside the Pulse nightclub this
morning,
a far remove from the chaos of
24 hours earlier.
Amateur video captured the
terror, gunshots
shattering the party atmosphere
inside the
club.
The man firing the shots was
29-year-old Omar
Mateen, ultimately killed by a
SWAT team inside.
Police said today they have no
regrets about
storming the club.
JOHN MINA, Orlando, Florida,
Police Chief:
Based on information we received
from the
suspect, and from the hostages,
and people
inside, we believed further loss
of life was
imminent. I made the decision to
commence
the rescue operation and do the
explosive
breach.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: During the
attack, Mateen
called 911 dispatchers and
pledged loyalty
to the Islamic State.
Today, ISIS radio released an
audio statement
calling him a soldier of the
caliphate. And
officials in Saudi Arabia
confirmed he'd visited
their country twice for
pilgrimages.
But, in Washington, FBI Director
James Comey
said there's every reason to
think Mateen
acted on his own.
JAMES COMEY, FBI Director: There
are strong
indications of radicalization by
this killer
and of potential inspiration by
foreign terrorist
organizations. So far, we see no
indication
that this was a plot directed
from outside
the United States, and we see no
indication
that he was part of any kind of
network.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The FBI had
investigated
Mateen on suspicions of
terrorist sympathies,
but the results were
inconclusive, and Comey
defended his agents' work.
JAMES COMEY: Our investigation
involved introducing
confidential sources to him,
recording conversations
with him, following him,
reviewing transactional
records from his communications,
and searching
all government holdings for any
possible connections,
any possible derogatory
information.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As
investigators now searched
the gunman's home in Fort
Pierce, Florida,
sharply differing images of him
have emerged.
His Afghan-born father
apologized again today
to the victims.
And in a Facebook video,
speaking in Dari,
he reflected on his son and the
crime he committed.
SEDDIQUE MIR MATEEN, Father of
Omar Mateen:
My son Omar a good son and
educated person.
I don't know what caused him to
do it. I don't
know what happened. And I didn't
know he had
hatred. The issue of
homosexuality and punishment
belongs to God. It doesn't
belong to a servant
of Allah
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But Mateen's
ex-wife painted
a starkly different picture,
saying he was
abusive, mentally unstable and
full of hate.
At the White House, President
Obama spoke
of his own concerns about such
individuals.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
One of the biggest challenges we
are going
to have is this kind of
propaganda and perversions
of Islam that you see generated
on the Internet,
and the capacity for that to
seep into the
minds of troubled individuals.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Meanwhile,
police said today
they have identified nearly all
of the victims,
among them, accountants,
baristas, hairdressers,
people, mostly young, who'd been
looking to
unwind with a night of music and
dancing.
With the city's wounds still
fresh, Orlando's
Mayor Buddy Dyer thanked the
city for its
response.
BUDDY DYER, Mayor of Orlando,
Florida: We
will not be defined by the act
of a cowardly
hater. We will be defined by how
we respond,
how we treat each other. And
this community
has already stepped up to do
that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: As the country
awaits the
latest developments in this
investigation,
a small army of volunteers here
in Orlando
have come to this community
center to do what
they can to help out.
They loaded food and water today
at Orlando's
biggest LGBT community center,
just minutes
from the site of the rampage.
Many said they
came to lend a hand, but also
just to be with
others in mourning.
COREY LYONS, President, Impulse
Orlando: It's
tragic. It's tragic across the
board. We saw
the act of what one person can
do, but in
the same day within 12 hours, we
saw the acts
of what many can do together to
really fight
this incident and really try to
come together.
CHRISTIE CRUZ, Volunteer: We're
all people,
and it just hurts cause it's
black, white,
gay, no matter what. It doesn't
matter,
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It's an attack
on everybody.
CHRISTIE CRUZ: It's just -- yes,
we're all
people, we're all human, and we
-- it's just
-- it's hard to deal with.
That's the thing
about the gay community, is, we
all know somebody
who knows somebody who knows
somebody, because
this is a close group, and we're
-- it hurts
us all.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The shooting
happened as
Latin Night at the Pulse
nightclub was winding
down, and a majority of the
victims identified
so far are Hispanic.
Christian Castelan is
Mexican-American and
gay.
CHRISTIAN CASTELAN, Volunteer: I
went out
to dinner last night with my
significant other
and other friends, and just
being closed to
him, that is even scary, after
what happened,
because I was constantly just
looking around.
It just went from completely
comfortable to
just completely fearful in a
matter of hours.
And it just continues to become
much more
difficult than what it was
yesterday.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: A vigil is
being held later
tonight for the victims of the
shooting. It's
about less than a mile away from
the nightclub
where they lost their lives --
Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: William, I just
heard that young
man said to say to you that they
went from
being comfortable to terrified
so quickly.
Is it fair to say that the
community is still
in a state of shock tonight?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Absolutely. I
mean, the
sense here is that this, like so
many other
communities that have
experienced this type
of a tragedy, the sense of
safety that they
had has been snatched away from
them.
And that's something we heard
not just from
the gay community, but largely
in that community
here, all over Orlando.
GWEN IFILL: So, William, is
there a special
impact in the gay -- if this was
Latin night
at a gay nightclub, a special
impact in the
gay and lesbian community?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It was,
absolutely.
I mean, the Latino community, as
we know,
it's largely a conservative
community. And
being gay in the Latino
community is not as
easy as it might be, say, in the
white community.
And a lot of people mentioned to
me that there
might be the possibility that
people who were
shot, people who might have been
killed or
wounded in this event might not
have been
out even to their own families.
And so now they are forced to
have this conversation
that maybe they weren't ready to
be having,
that, oh, I was at this club
when this happened.
It just raised one more level of
a very, very
uncomfortable conversation for
them at a time
of this awful tragedy going on
here.
GWEN IFILL: And is there
evidence now of heightened
security around, in and around
Orlando, but
especially in that neighborhood?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Absolutely. We
spent a good
deal of time today and yesterday
at that community
center.
And now even there every time
they don't let
people stand outside, for fear
of drive-by
shootings. They are checking
bags everywhere
they go. How much of that lasts
after this
event dies down and people start
to go on
with their lives, we don't know.
But there
is a very strong sense of
security here everywhere.
GWEN IFILL: William, thank so
much. We will
hear from you again tomorrow
night.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
good night, Gwen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And some
perspective now on
how intelligence and law
enforcement agencies
try to find and stop people like
the Orlando
killer.
We turn to two men with
extensive experience
in counterterrorism operations
and investigations.
Michael Leiter was the director
the National
Counterterrorism center from
2007 to 2011,
during both the George W. Bush
and Obama administrations.
And Ali Soufan was a supervisory
special agent
with the FBI, where he worked on
both domestic
and international terrorism
investigations.
He now runs a security and
intelligence consulting
business.
And we welcome both of you to
the program.
Michael Leiter, to you first.
Based on everything
you know, how do you assess the
job that the
FBI and other government
agencies did in looking
into what they heard about Omar
Mateen?
MICHAEL LEITER, Former Director,
National
Counterterrorism Center: Well,
let's start
with the premise that this is a
very hard
job.
As Jim Comey said today, they
not only have
to find needles in a haystack.
They have to
predict which pieces of the way
ill eventually
become needles. I think what
Director Comey
said was that they did a fair
amount of information
of this individual in 2014, to
include running
operatives against him, doing
surveillance,
doing electronic surveillance.
And all of that led them to
conclude that
this wasn't a threat. And that
really suggests
to me that if there had been
almost anything
there at the time, other than
hearsay, they
would have continued the
investigation. So
clearly they didn't predict this
one right.
I think it's still too early to
know whether
at the time they should have
done more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ali Soufan, in
looking at what
the FBI did, we heard Director
Comey they
did a 10-month investigation.
What would that
have involved?
ALI SOUFAN, Former FBI
Interrogator: Well,
I think we heard from Director
Comey that
they put someone undercover,
they put a source
on the individual, they probably
investigated
his criminal record.
They did probably a thorough
investigation
to see if he is connected to any
ongoing investigation
or any individuals who are
suspected terrorists
or are part of any
investigation. They probably
checked his digital footprint.
They saw if
he has contact with suspicious
entities or
terrorist entities.
They probably looked into his
phone record.
And at the time, the assessment
was that he
is not connected. And by law,
the FBI has
to close that investigation. If
they can't
articulate that that
investigation, there
is probably a reasonable
suspicion or probable
cause to have the investigation
going, then
they could have had a full
investigation.
But at the time, it seems that
there was no
indication whatsoever that that
individual
was involved or connected to
suspected entities.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Michael Leiter,
how much harder
is it to find something on
someone when they
don't seem to have a single
allegiance? At
the end, Omar Mateen talked
about ISIS, but,
earlier, his co-workers had said
he talked
about al-Qaida.
He mentioned the al-Nusra. He
befriended a
man who had gone off to fight
for the al-Nusra
Front. How much more difficult
does that make
it?
MICHAEL LEITER: It makes it much
harder.
We used to say the U.S. is a
melting pot for
a lot of reasons, including in
the terrorist
minds. Allegiances and
dalliances that would
never occur overseas because of
the purity
to allegiance to Hezbollah vs.
ISIS would
never occur, but here in the
U.S., when you
have a confused and clearly
deranged individual,
searching out almost anything,
almost any
ideology, any group that gives
them a feeling
of worth and ultimately
justifies these horrendous
acts of violence.
So it makes it that much harder,
because you
don't have a clear path to
follow. There isn't
-- they aren't fitting the mold
that we often
expect to see with other
terrorist groups
and individuals overseas.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Ali Soufan,
should there
be a rethinking of these watch
lists and what
it takes to be on one or be
taken off of one?
ALI SOUFAN: Well, I think if he
is a subject
of an initial investigation, he
is going to
be on a watch list.
And if that investigation is
closed, he will
be removed off the watch list. I
think Michael
is right in what he mentioned.
We're talking
about an individual, in this
case, for example,
who seems to be so confused.
One day, he claims to be a
member of Hezbollah,
which is a Shiite organization.
Another day,
his family is connected to
al-Qaida. And then
he praised just before he was
killed an individual
who was a suicide bomber for
al-Nusra, an
entity that is not in good terms
with ISIS.
And then he gave his regards and
admiration
for the Boston bombers, two
individuals who
have nothing to do with ISIS.
ISIS in this
case appeared to have no idea
about what this
guy did. They didn't control his
operation.
They don't appear to be
directing that operation.
And even their alleged claim of
responsibility
was based on circular media, was
based on
what they are gathering of U.S.
media regarding
that operation. So now we have a
case of an
individual who went to do his
crime and at
the last second he said, oh, by
the way, I
am ISIS.
And now we look at it not as a
hate crime,
but we're looking at it as a
terrorist -- rightly
so, as a terrorist massacre.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Michael
Leiter, what does
that say for future efforts on
the part of
investigators? Because we keep
hearing that
there are hundreds, maybe even
thousands of
young people around this
country, mostly young
men, who may be sympathetic, may
hear something
in ISIS or another of these
groups that they
are interested in. What does it
say about
future efforts to ferret these
people out
before they do something?
MICHAEL LEITER: Judy, you and I
have sat here
after San Bernardino, after
Paris. This is
an incredibly hard fight.
And we really revolutionized how
we did counterterrorism
post-9/11. And we have gotten so
much better
at working against complex plots
overseas.
But I think we're approaching
the point where
we have to seriously consider
how we revolutionize
counterterrorism now to optimize
our ability
to find these.
And it would require huge
changes. It would
require a lowering of the bar to
do surveillance
in certain operations. That is
out canning
against the grain of the
post-Snowden era.
It would require a huge increase
in resources,
both for the FBI and state and
local law enforcement.
And it might also require
diminishing the
ability to obtain firearms.
These are all big choices. And
as tragic as
this is, it still isn't clear to
me that we
have the political will to go
down that path.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you see
that, Ali Soufan?
What does it take to make the
efforts of law
enforcement more successful at
finding these
people before they act?
ALI SOUFAN: Well, I think, first
of all, I
agree with what Michael said.
But, since 9/11, we have been
very successful
tactically in combating the
threat. Unfortunately,
when it comes to the ideology,
we haven't
been that successful. We have
been behind
the eight-ball. We didn't do
much to counter
the incubating factors that is
leading into
this. We haven't been countering
the ideology
and countering the narrative as
we should
online.
And I think we need to develop
some kind of
21st century policing model
where we can include
the community inside the pipe,
that they feel
that they are part of the
solution, not part
of the problem, not to say that
specific communities
around the nation haven't been
working very
closely with law enforcement.
For example, most of the
disruptions that
took place in the last few
years, significant
number was based on tips from
the community.
But I think we need to develop a
21st century
policing model that includes a
way to, you
know, promote the idea of, if
you see something,
say something, in specific
communities around
the United States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ali Soufan,
Michael Leiter,
we thank you both.
MICHAEL LEITER: Thank you.
ALI SOUFAN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now we turn
now to Capitol
Hill and how lawmakers are
responding to the
attack in Orlando.
We begin with Senator Dianne
Feinstein, a
Democrat from California. She is
the ranking
member of the Intelligence
Committee.
Senator Feinstein, welcome back
to the "NewsHour."
I don't know if you have been
able to hear
the conversation we have just
been having.
But based on what you know, is
it your sense
that law enforcement
intelligence agencies
did everything they could to do
something
about this man, Omar Mateen,
before this happened?
SEN. DIANNE FEINSTEIN (D),
California: Well,
first of all, Judy, I have great
respect both
for Mike Leiter and Ali Soufan.
So, I very
much agree with what they have
had to say.
With respect of dealing with the
classic lone
wolf, we are, I think, seeing
the real problem.
And the one thing that came out
of all of
this that I thought was good is
that the Islamic
community, and particularly the
religious
part of that community, is
beginning to stand
up, take notice and say, no,
this is not us,
and say it over and over and
over again.
And this last perpetrator that
really did
such a dastardly event by
striking at a lesbian
and gay community that has
struggled for equality
over so many years, and now to
have them subject
to this kind of terrible event
is just really
awful.
Having said that, I think that,
as time goes
on, we're going to increasingly
realize, as
Ali spoke about, Ali Soufan
spoke about, of
how we get a countermessage out
in a way that
is effective.
I think law enforcement has
responded. As
far as I know, this country is
responding
with full resources. The FBI has
sent an additional
complement of men, of 80 men and
women, into
Florida. They have a big number
already in
Florida.
They are leading the
investigation. Everybody
is cooperating. And I think the
investigation
seems to be going very well. How
you stop
this doesn't seem to be going
very well. This
is a man, nine years employed,
good job, semi-law
enforcement, wanted law
enforcement, went
to mosques, prayed, and somehow
became so
alienated.
Now, whether this is from social
media, whether
it's from contact, or whether
it's really
a displaced aggression, I don't
know. But
this is a big problem. And we're
going to
be stuck with it for a very long
time, I believe.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator, I want
to ask you
about the fact that you are one
of those in
the Senate who is pushing this
legislation
to prevent individuals on a
terror watch list
from buying, obtaining a firearm
or explosives.
Why do you think you may have
some success
with that now, when it's been
impossible to
pass in the past?
SEN. DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Well, I
think people
are beginning to realize that
the attorney
general should have the ability
to place people
on the terrorist watch list and
deny sale
of weapons to them.
And this bill essentially gives
the attorney
general those regulations in
law. In other
words, she can move to take
action. And that
is what this bill does. I think
it's very,
very important.
I think, on another subject, the
AR-15, this
is a military-style assault
weapon, in its
truest sense of the word, big
bullets, terrible
physical damage. Look at the
death rate, and
I think more of that will come
out.
Not to take action -- we tried
after Sandy
Hook. We failed. I tried after
San Bernardino
to get this no guns for
terrorists through.
We failed. This Congress has to
realize that
they need to step up and we need
to protect
people now.
And I think we have got a full
component of
law enforcement. I think we have
got relatively
good intelligence. As Director
Comey told
us, there is an investigation
going on in
every state.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator, two
things.
If Omar Mateen -- Omar Mateen,
as you know,
wasn't on a watch list in the
most recent
past. So he wouldn't have been
prevented from
buying a weapon. But, second of
all, the argument
that many of your Republican
colleagues have
made about this is that there is
still the
potential that people who are
innocent are
on a watch list, and they would
be prevented
from buying a gun.
SEN. DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Well,
then you can
petition and prove that you are
innocent and
get off of the watch list.
But, you know, if we want to
prevent this
-- you know, this bill was
drafted actually
during the Bush administration
when a man,
a terrorist, went back to Syria,
an American,
and said to everybody, now
exploit the loopholes
in America's laws, and you buy
weapons.
Well, this is -- we have got
huge loopholes.
And it's wrong. And we have got
to begin to
close them one by one by one.
The terrorist
bill, no guns for terrorists, is
the first
step. Assault weapons is the
second step.
This man shouldn't have been
able -- if he
had been on the terrorist watch
list, he wouldn't
have been able to buy that
assault weapon.
And I think that's important.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Dianne
Feinstein, we
thank you.
SEN. DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Thank
you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now we get a
Republican
perspective now from Congressman
Will Hurd
of Texas. He's on the House
Committee on Homeland
Security. He previously served
as an undercover
officer for the CIA in the
Middle East and
South Asia.
Congressman Hurd, thank you for
being with
us. I don't know if you heard,
but Senator
Dianne Feinstein just said that
it's time
for Congress to step up in the
wake of this
horrible incident in Orlando.
And, as you know, she and other
senators are
promoting legislation that would
make it impossible
for someone on a terror watch
list to buy
a weapon.
Congressman Hurd, are you able
to hear me?
REP. WILL HURD (R), Texas: Yes.
Yes. Yes,
Judy.
Listen, nobody is supporting
putting weapons
in the hands of terrorists. But
the reality
is, it's unfortunate when an
event like what
happened in Orlando, both sides
of the political
aisle retreat to some of the
same tired talking
points.
The bill that the good senator
from California
was talking about wouldn't have
prevented
what happened in Orlando. It
wouldn't have
prevented what happened in San
Bernardino.
The reality is, on a no-fly list
-- if you
are on a no-fly list now and you
try to buy
a weapon, that information goes
to the FBI,
and the FBI has influence on
whether that
sale is able to go through or
not.
The reality is, is what we need
to be focused
on here is focusing on taking
the fight to
the doorsteps of terrorists,
whether it's
ISIS, al-Qaida, Lashkar-e-Taiba,
Boko Haram.
We need to take the fight to
them.
And we also need to make sure
that we are
countering that ideology . The
two gentlemen
earlier were talking about this.
What makes
ISIS so dangerous is its ability
to inspire
people, even if they are 6,000
miles away
and they have never met them.
We are a country that has the
most creative
minds, the best brands. We
should be all working
together to counter this
ideology. And the
third thing we need to be doing
is making
sure that we have national
intelligence information
in the hands of local law
enforcement. We
see what happened in Orlando and
San Bernardino,
that it was local law
enforcement that has
to respond to these kind of
activities.
And when I started in the CIA,
it was before
9/11. And have I seen how
intelligence-sharing
has improved significantly from
that time
to now. The next step is making
sure we're
getting the right information in
the hands
of local law enforcement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Congressman,
why wouldn't
it be another important tool in
the hands
of law enforcement to be able to
say if someone's
on a watch list, if they are
being investigated
for something they did or are
suspected of
doing, that they should at least
during that
period not be allowed to buy a
weapon or explosives?
REP. WILL HURD: Well...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why is that
objectionable?
REP. WILL HURD: Again, the
failsafe is there
if you are on the no-fly list.
If are you
are on the no-fly, the FBI is
reviewing that
information.
The reality is, is a weapon is
just a tool.
Whether you use a long gun, a
handgun or explosives,
these are tools in the hands of
a terrorist.
And if you are that deranged
that you are
willing to kill 49 innocent
people and take
your own life, then are you
going to get that
tool however you can in order to
do your deed.
And I think the important thing
that we need
to be focusing on is what I just
said. Take
the fight to them and make sure
that we're
countering that ideology. And
that is where
-- there is not going to be any
one piece
of legislation that prevents
another Orlando
from happening.
It is going to be a lot of work.
This is something
that has been going on and that
the House
has been looking at for the last
15 months.
I sat on a task force that
looked at four
and five years going into Iraq
and Syria.
And we have had nine pieces of
legislation
that tightens up loopholes in
our visa process
to make sure that we are still
allowing commerce
and people to move back and
forth, but it's
making sure that we're having
all the tools
and information in the hands of
people that
are issuing the visas.
So, this is a long-term fight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Congressman, is
there any additional
restriction on the ability of
individuals
who are being investigated, who
may have committed
a crime or maybe thinking about
a terrorist
act, who have been proven in
some way, or
who law enforcement has a reason
to be concerned
about, is there any additional
restriction
that you would be willing to go
along with
in order to strengthen the hands
of law enforcement
in this country, where, as you
say, there
is a worry that people may be
committing an
act in sympathy with ISIS or
another terror
group?
REP. WILL HURD: Well, the
reality is, there
has been a lot of focus on the
Orlando killer
and how they were interviewed
three times
by the FBI.
The FBI had a 10-month
investigation. They
ran undercover officers against
him. And they
found out he wasn't connected in
any form
or fashion. It's not breaking
the law to be
interviewed by the FBI. The FBI
has a difficult
task. And this lone wolf
scenario is one of
the hardest things for law
enforcement to
fight against.
And that's why we need to make
sure we're
doing everything we can to get
information
in their hands. So, you know,
this is the
time that we should be working
together, across
the aisle on making sure that
we're focused
on the real issue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Congressman Will
Hurd, we thank
you very much.
REP. WILL HURD: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will be
devoting the
rest of this program to killing
in Orlando,
after the news summary.
GWEN IFILL: And in the day's
other news: An
Indiana man is jailed in Santa
Monica, California,
after police arrested him
Sunday, heavily
armed and headed to a gay pride
parade. James
Howell will appear in court
tomorrow. Police
say he was carrying three
assault rifles and
chemicals used in explosives.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. Supreme
Court rebuffed
Puerto Rico today over its debt
crisis. The
court ruled federal law bars the
commonwealth
from restructuring part of the
$70 billion
it owes. Instead, it must wait
for Congress
to finish debt relief
legislation.
The justices also refused to
freeze federal
curbs on power plant emissions
of mercury.
Twenty states wanted the rules
delayed.
GWEN IFILL: In Iraq, the
government says it's
investigating reports that
Shiite militias
have killed Sunni men escaping
from Fallujah.
The Shiites are supporting an
Iraqi army offensive
to retake the city from Islamic
State fighters.
Iraqi troops have been slowly
advancing into
Fallujah for three weeks now.
Over the weekend,
4,000 civilians managed to
escape.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The city of
Marseille, France,
was rocked by soccer violence
over the weekend
between Russian and English fans
at the European
Championship tournament.
European soccer's
governing body warned both
sides, but a court
handed down prison terms for
only one side.
Emma Murphy of Independent
Television News
reports from Marseille.
EMMA MURPHY: That they were
organized, determined,
and extremely violent was
obvious to anyone
who saw the violence in
Marseille this weekend.
Now the French authorities have
admitted a
gang of 150 known Russian
hooligans managed
to get into the country, and
indeed the stadium,
to foment three days of
brutality. Not one
has been arrested.
Describing them as ultra-rapid,
ultra-violent
and extremely well-trained,
Marseille's prosecutor
acknowledged some had been
stopped at the
airport, but the rest breached
French security
and are free to infiltrate other
games.
"The hooligans from Russia
traveled from other
countries on trains and in
cars," he told
me. "We would have known and
arrested them
had they come through the
airport."
The Russians were the most
organized and violent,
but it was the English fans who
were in court
today, six in all arrested for
violence.
During the course of the
weekend, 35 people
were injured, four seriously.
These scenes
led to UEFA's threat to throw
both England
and Russia out of the
tournament. Today, England's
manager and captain, Wayne
Rooney, appealed
to fans for no repeat.
ROY HODGSON, English Soccer
Manager: I'm appealing
to you to stay out of trouble
and try and
make certain these threats that
are being
issued are never carried out.
WAYNE ROONEY, English Soccer
Captain: I would
like to ask the fans, please, if
you don't
have a ticket, don't travel. And
for the fans
with tickets, be safe, be
sensible.
EMMA MURPHY: This city is now
calm for the
first time in three days. And
with today's
sentences, it seems the French
authorities
are keen to send out a strong
message to deter
others from violent actions.
However, with no Russians in
custody, that
message is significantly
weakened.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The French
prosecutor says
police are studying
closed-circuit TV footage,
and trying to track down the
Russians involved
in the violence.
GWEN IFILL: Microsoft made a
surprise move
today and announced it is buying
the professional
networking site LinkedIn. The
price tag? More
than $26 billion. It's the
largest acquisition
in Microsoft's history, and it
gives the software
giant access to LinkedIn's 430
million members.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The sell-off that
hit Wall
Street late last week carried
over to today.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost nearly
133 points to close at 17732.
The Nasdaq fell
46 points, and the S&P 500
dropped 17.
GWEN IFILL: The Broadway musical
"Hamilton"
and the Pittsburgh Penguins now
have something
in common: Both are big winners.
Pittsburgh
took the National Hockey League
title last
night, beating the San Jose
Sharks in six
games. It's the fourth Stanley
Cup in the
franchise's history.
And "Hamilton," the hip-hop
stage biography
of former Treasury Secretary
Alexander Hamilton,
won 11 Tony Awards, including
best musical.
That's one shy of the record.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still to come on
the "NewsHour":
Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump
issue calls
to action in response to the
Orlando shooting;
plus, a look at the prejudice
the LGBT community
still faces.
GWEN IFILL: We turn now to
politics.
Presidential candidates Hillary
Clinton and
Donald Trump both scaled back
scheduled campaign
events today in the wake of the
Orlando shooting.
Both responded to the tragedy,
in very different
ways.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Today is not a day for politics.
On Sunday, Americans woke up to
a nightmare
that's become mind-numbingly
familiar, another
act of terrorism in a place no
one expected.
This is a moment when all
Americans need to
stand together. No matter how
many times we
endure attacks like this, the
horror never
fades. The murder of innocent
people breaks
our hearts, tears at our sense
of security,
and makes us furious.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
The bottom line is that Hillary
supports policies
that bring the threat of radical
Islam into
America and allow it to grow
overseas, and
it is growing.
In fact, Hillary Clinton's
catastrophic immigration
plan will bring vastly more
radical Islamic
immigration into this country,
threatening
not only our society, but our
entire way of
life. We need a new leader. We
need a new
leader fast. They have put
political correctness
above common sense, above your
safety, and
above all else. I refuse to be
politically
correct.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GWEN IFILL: For more on the
candidates' response
to the deadly shooting in
Orlando, we turn
to Politics Monday, with Amy
Walter of The
Cook Political Report and Tamara
Keith of
NPR, who is joining us tonight
from Cleveland.
Amy, both candidates said this
wasn't a day
for politics, and Hillary
Clinton didn't mention
Donald Trump by name. But she
still slid in
her little digs.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Yes.
And Donald Trump mentioned
Hillary Clinton
explicitly many times during the
debate -- during
his press conference today.
Look, I think the candidates
that you saw
today giving speeches in
response to Orlando
aren't any different from the
candidates that
you see on the campaign trail.
You had, in
Donald Trump, the bold, the
brash, the controversial.
He doubled down on the Muslim
ban. Talked
about sort of an us vs. them
look at the world.
Hillary Clinton, much more
measured, much
more traditional, political and
she talked
about a we vs. me mentality.
So, for anybody who is sort of
on the fence
about this campaign, who says I
don't really
know the differences between
these two candidates,
how would they react to a crisis
situation
or a big event as president of
the United
States, you got a very clear
idea of the differences
between the two of them today.
GWEN IFILL: Tam, but Donald
Trump didn't just
double down on what he has said
before about
banning Muslims. He talked today
about banning
entire nationalities.
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Right,
he said -- and this was an
expansion -- that
he would put a temporary ban on
immigration
from countries that support
terrorism or where
terrorism against America has
originated,
which could include a whole lot
of countries.
We don't have details on which
those would
be. He also in that speech said
that Hillary
Clinton wants to do away with
the Second Amendment,
take away people's guns and
allow terrorists
into the country and then people
wouldn't
be able to defend themselves.
That, of course,
is not Hillary Clinton's policy.
But there
you have it.
GWEN IFILL: Tam, it seems to me
that at least
the Democrats have their talking
points in
order. The president did this
with us on our
"NewsHour" town hall not long
ago, talking
about terror watch lists and how
Congress
should at least allow them to
deny gun purchases
to people on the watch lists.
We heard Dianne Feinstein say it
again just
now to Judy. And we heard
Hillary Clinton
say it. So, is that the line,
that the Democrats
will always talk about guns and
the Republicans
will always talk about
immigration?
TAMARA KEITH: That seems to be
the way this
keeps happening.
And we should note that this is
not the first
time that these presidential
candidates have
had to respond to a terrorist
incident. This
one happens to be bigger and
here at home.
But the response has been
essentially the
same each time. Hillary Clinton
this time
is talking about wanting to
possibly expand
terror lists.
But, essentially, it is the same
conversation
about guns and about terrorism.
And it goes
round and round and round again.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
And the sort of depressing piece
about all
of this is, they are talking
about legislation
that is unlikely to get anywhere
within Congress,
whether it's more attempts to
control guns,
or, you know, to have more
regulation around
guns, or whether it is about
banning Muslims
or people who are coming in, as
Tam pointed
out, from countries that support
terrorism.
Those are things that aren't
going to make
it through Congress.
GWEN IFILL: What is unique about
Donald Trump
is that he starts every response
by saying,
see, I was right.
AMY WALTER: Yes, see, I was
right.
And he also said, I can do these
things on
banning certain people through
my own orders.
I won't need Congress to be able
to do that.
GWEN IFILL: So, Tam, do we -- I
know we say
this a lot. But I'm curious
whether moments
like this, kind of somber, big
moments, represent
that a turning point, or at
least a clarifying
point in a campaign, especially
as we get
ready to turn to the general
election.
TAMARA KEITH: This is absolutely
one of those
moments, just like Paris, just
like San Bernardino.
Those were moments in the
campaign where we
all paused and we thought that
this could
be a defining moment.
What we don't know -- those
previous incidents
were defining moments. Donald
Trump came out
strong. He talked about a Muslim
ban. He did
better among Republican voters
after those
incidents. His poll numbers
improved.
What we don't know this time
around is whether
it's different. You know what? A
Republican
primary electorate is very
different from
a general election electorate.
There are a
lot more people who have very
different views.
And it is just not clear at this
point.
It is a moment. We don't know
quite what the
moment means in terms of how
this will play
out over the next several weeks
and months.
GWEN IFILL: Let's talk about
terminology,
because one of the things that
Donald Trump
is counting on is that in the
past this has
worked for him, this really
tough response.
AMY WALTER: Right.
GWEN IFILL: But now, today, he
was talking
a lot about she won't use the
words radical
Islamism. And she said, well, I
do too kind
of.
What is that really about?
AMY WALTER: Right, it seems that
what Hillary
Clinton was trying to do, at
least this morning
-- she didn't do it in her
speech today -- but
by taking the issue radical
Islam, radical
jihadism and sort of saying, I
can do either
or both of those, and say, I
don't want to
get in a debate over semantics.
I would rather get in a debate
over what is
happening in this country with
individuals
who are using faith to do
terrible things.
In the past, though, she has
said we don't
want to call it radical Islam,
because then
we are maligning entire -- an
entire religion.
We don't want to focus on the
religious part.
We want to focus on the actions.
I think, in essence, what they
are trying
to do -- and I don't know if
this is correct.
But, in essence, what they are
trying to do
is to say, you know, look, this
issue is not
something I want to get in a
fight about anymore.
I think it's getting tougher and
tougher for
them to try and take parse these
words and
to defend not taking on Muslim
religion, and
instead start where Donald Trump
does and
say, we're not going to go as
far as he does
in terms of banning all Muslims.
GWEN IFILL: And, Tam, I want to
talk about
another piece of terminology,
which is the
LGBT community, we heard Donald
Trump say
today, I'm a better -- I will be
a better
friend because I will act and
Hillary just
has words.
Is that actually true? Does it
seem that way?
It seems to me the big groups
have endorsed
Hillary Clinton already.
TAMARA KEITH: The big groups
have endorsed
Hillary Clinton already. And she
is very popular
among some large portion of the
LGBT community.
Donald Trump, though,
interestingly, you know,
has not wanted to fight in fight
in that arena.
There are other candidates who
were running
in the Republican primary who
wanted to talk
about gay marriage and wanted to
talk about
bathroom laws. And Donald Trump
has, generally
speaking, taken a more tolerant
view.
That seems to be an area that he
doesn't want
to get into too much.
GWEN IFILL: Not on gay marriage.
TAMARA KEITH: Not on gay
marriage, for instance.
GWEN IFILL: Right. OK, on gay
marriage, he
is, I think, in line with the
Republican Party.
OK, Tam Keith, we're done here.
Amy Walter,
we're done here.
AMY WALTER: We're done, for now.
GWEN IFILL: Thank you both.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
AMY WALTER: You're welcome.
GWEN IFILL: The president has
called the shootings
not just an act of terror, but
also an act
of hate. This is not the first
time that members
of the LGBT community have been
targets, but
in the wake of decades of
progress and acceptance,
it is resonating differently
now.
We examine that with Rachel
Tiven, the incoming
CEO of Lambda Legal, a national
organization
which works for the civil rights
of lesbians,
gay men, bisexuals and
transgender people,
and Mark Potok of the Southern
Poverty Law
Center, which closely monitors
hate crimes
and threats throughout the
United States.
Mark Potok, I want to start by
asking for
a definition here. What is a
hate crime?
MARK POTOK, Southern Poverty Law
Center: Well,
the definitions are a bit fuzzy,
because,
of course, there are many state
laws that
all express it differently.
But, essentially, a hate crime
is a crime
that is motivated in whole or in
part by bias
against a particular named class
of people,
LGBT people, black people, white
people, certain
religions and so on. It is
generally different,
I think, than terrorism, in the
sense that
it is not a kind of public
display crime.
It can happen in private with no
notice at
all. So it's not the kind of
crime that is
carried out in order to send a
message to
thousands of people, as
terrorist crimes are,
or to change the way an entire
community acts.
GWEN IFILL: Rachel Tiven, is it
significant,
or was it significant to you to
hear the president
of the United States immediately
go to the
word hate in describing what he
saw happen
in Orlando?
RACHEL TIVEN, Incoming CEO,
Lambda Legal:
Absolutely, because it is
important for the
president to acknowledge the
victims here.
And I want to talk about the
victims. The
victims of this crime were LGBT
Latinos and
their friends and their allies.
And that -- seeing
that either be lost in this
conversation or,
worse, be appropriated by people
who have
sought to harm LGBT people in
the past is
really bitter and hollow at this
time.
GWEN IFILL: Well, could you
expand on that
a little bit? What is
significant -- specifically
significant about the fact that
the targets
in this case were Latinos, gays
and lesbians?
RACHEL TIVEN: What is
significant is that
this wasn't an accidental
target, right?
The perpetrator of this crime
didn't happen
to be walking by and choose this
target by
accident. We have heard that --
from his father
that he harbored significant
animosity toward
LGBT people, and that that may
have been -- when
we find out from the FBI more
about his motives,
that may have been a part of the
narrative.
But we don't even need to ask
what the motive
was. When you target a gay club,
a place that
LGBT people go to congregate and
murder the
people who are there,
unfortunately, that
is an act that speaks for
itself.
GWEN IFILL: Mark Potok, I know
you keep track
of hate crimes around the
country, and I wonder
as you -- in your records, how
much more does
this happen -- or does it happen
more with
LGBT people than other people?
How much of
a target is that community?
MARK POTOK: Very much so.
We looked actually at 14 years
of FBI data,
hate crime data, and made
comparisons to the
size of the populations of
various minority
groups in this country. And to
make a very
long story short, what we found
was that,
on a per capita basis, at least
in recent
years, LGBT people are targeted
for violent
hate crimes at a rate of two
times that of
gay -- I'm sorry -- of Muslims
or black people,
four times that of Jews, and 14
times that
of Latinos.
So, the bottom line is that LGBT
people really
are targeted in a way that no
other minority
group or at a rate higher than
any other minority
group in this country, at least
in recent
times.
(CROSSTALK)
MARK POTOK: I think maybe it's
worth pointing
out that, just three years ago,
on New Year's
Eve of 2013 in Seattle, a man
tried to burn
alive 750 people in an upstairs
gay club there
called Neighbours. He wasn't
successful. Quick-thinking
patrons discovered the fire in
the stairwell
and put it out.
But there might well have been
an enormous
casualty list in that case.
GWEN IFILL: Rachel Tiven, is
this, any of
this, in your observation,
opinion, backlash
against the gains that LGBT
people have made
in recent years, including
marriage?
RACHEL TIVEN: Unfortunately, we
have seen
backlash.
We have seen that, in the past
year, more
than 200 bills have been
introduced by state
legislatures and localities
around the country,
not just in a couple of states,
seeking to
strip LGBT people of equal
rights, seeking
to avoid protection from
discrimination for
LGBT people.
And we have seen lies, right? We
have seen
lies about who LGBT people are.
We have seen
state legislatures say that
there is a danger
to washing your hands in a
bathroom next to
a transgender person, when they
know that
that is untrue.
And I think that, after the
incredible that
carnage that we saw this week,
to honor the
memories of the people who died
by saying
enough, enough. We're going to
come together
and we're going to end this hate
speech against
LGBT people. We are going to
stop lying about
who LGBT people are, in the way
that, after
Charleston, which is a sad
anniversary we
are approaching, that the
country came together
and said, we're going to examine
how we talk
about race and what symbols we
use, because
attacking people because someone
is uncomfortable
with who other people are and
the ways that
they are different from them,
that's not American.
GWEN IFILL: Let me ask you both
this question,
finally, which is, how much more
power does
this particular attack have on
the imagination,
to the degree that it has been
tied up with
terrorism, as opposed to -- in
addition to
hate crimes, Mark Potok?
MARK POTOK: Well, I think it has
a great power
on the imagination.
I mean, the carnage was just
incredible, and
the mixture of motives. I mean,
it seems to
me it's very unclear what this
man's motives
were. They seem to have really
been all three
strands, a kind of terrorist
strand, to the
extent he seems to be at least
somewhat related
to Islamist ideas, a hate crime
strand, in
that it was clearly a huge
animus directed
against LGBT people, and then a
mental health,
or just kind of internal rage
strand, in which
this man seemed to be angry at
absolutely
everyone around him.
GWEN IFILL: And, briefly, Rachel
Tiven?
RACHEL TIVEN: Well, we shouldn't
be surprised,
unfortunately. Right?
We shouldn't be surprised that
the kind of
animosity that has been
sanctioned by state
and local governments around the
country,
when mixed with easy access to
heavy weapons,
leads to a tragedy like this
one.
GWEN IFILL: Rachel Tiven of
Lambda Legal and
Mark Potok of the Southern
Poverty Law Center,
thank you both very much.
RACHEL TIVEN: Thank you.
MARK POTOK: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We close now with
a look at
the vigils and memorials that
have taken place
around the country to show
solidarity with
the victims in Orlando.
and one unit of faith, and one
prayer, and
join in our hearts together with
the victims,
with the families, the friends,
the loved
ones. It breaks out hearts, and
that is why
we have all gathered here.
WOMAN: Every couple of months,
it feels like
some other group is targeted, a
black church,
a school, a gay club. And the
world we live
in is filled with intimate and
tragic moments
of pain and hatred and violence.
We don't
always know how to respond.
WOMAN: Fifty people who I didn't
know, but
were part of my community, were
killed. And
they were killed for exact
reasons that I
could be killed or my
congregation could be
killed or people I love.
WOMAN: We are one people who
share the bond
of humanity and the shared
values of the sanctity
of life and the freedom to live
as we see
fit. We reject your hatred, and
we assert
our love.
GWEN IFILL: Our coverage
continues online,
where you can watch President
Obama discuss
stopping terrorists from getting
guns in an
exclusive clip from our recent
town hall,
compare U.S. gun laws to those
of other countries
in an explainer from the Council
on Foreign
Relations, and read how two
poets mourned
last year's deadly mass shooting
at a Charleston,
South Carolina, church.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Tuesday, we will look at a
controversial
program to combat violent
extremism born here
at home and abroad.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.